[Music]
it's really exciting to be back
especially hearing that um as you
mentioned that this will be the i am the
first ever person to to do
two uh royal institution live streams
which is really awesome
and i'm very humble and grateful uh to
be back so thank you everyone for
wanting to hear more
about the millennium problems so i will
be covering the three remaining problems
that we didn't quite manage to get to uh
last time
but i will give everybody a recap of
what the setup is and what those
problems are
that were covered very quickly last time
just to make sure
that we're all on the same page okay um
so the millennium problems uh they are
the million dollar equations as the
title of the
talk says um so here is a case of a
million dollars and i'm again
wearing my my million dollar t-shirt
which i also had on last time
um so the idea um
was that in the year 2000 the clay
institute
a um an institute in the u.s
who have lots of money um wanted to use
some of this money to help promote
uh mathematics and help to encourage
more people to engage with maths
research
and one of the ideas they came up with
in order to do this
was to create the millennium problems so
this was the year 2000
when lots of things were happening
around the millennium
and they decided on seven problems which
were deemed to be
the greatest unsolved problems in
mathematics
at the time and they set these prizes
up such that anyone who could solve one
of these problems uh would be awarded
one million
dollars now to be considered to be a
problem
um you have to satisfy this very vague
criteria which was that it had to be a
classical problem
that had resisted solution for many
years
so there's lots of interesting things i
can say about this but
the main thing for me is that it doesn't
mention
that this must be an applied problem or
that
the the maths must lead to a change in
the world
for example that there's no sort of
uh there's nothing there saying that it
has to really affect people's lives
it's basically just saying we want
really hard math problems
that are interesting mainly to
mathematicians and if they happen to do
other cool stuff
that would also be nice but really it
was
really difficult really fundamental
maths problems
that were considered and made it onto
the final list of seven
so the ones that i covered in the first
talk and you should definitely go and
watch the uh the youtube video of the
first talk but i will very briefly
summarize them for you
uh so we did the riemann hypothesis uh
perhaps the most famous
of the millennium problems um and this
fundamentally is asking about our
understanding of the prime numbers
um so a prime number is something that's
only divisible uh by itself and
one it has no other factors that will go
into that number for example seven
is a prime number but nine would not be
because 3 times 3 would give you 9.
and this well we don't really understand
the distribution of the prime numbers
on the number line they seem almost to
not have a pattern
and the riemann hypothesis we think
gives us some clues as to what that
pattern
underlying pattern might be um so as i
said this is the most famous i think of
of the millennium problems it's also i
believe listed
uh in the guinness book of world records
as the world's most difficult maths
problem
where they judge that based on the
number of unsuccessful proofs
so more people have tried to solve this
than any other maths problem
without succeeding which i think
according to the guinness book of world
records makes it the most difficult
maths problem in the world um so we've
got riemann
uh the second one that i discussed last
time is p
versus np this is all about
algorithms and sort of how computers
work how computers solve
problems and what the question
fundamentally asks
is we have two different types of
problem
those which are easy to check
the solution for so it's easy to mark if
someone gives you a solution you can
very quickly check if it's correct or
not
and those problems are called np
problems and then we have p
problems and they are problems which are
easy to solve
in the first place and the p versus np
millennium problem asks are these two
things the same
does p equal np or are they
different and you have to be able to
prove this in order to earn your
your million dollars uh the third one we
talked about
my favorite totally biased because i
study fluid mechanics
is the navier-stokes equations so
um this is a set of equations which
describes the motion
the behavior the the properties of
basically any fluid that you can think
of and when we say fluid we do include
gases
our fluids as well as liquids and we
have a set of equations
that describe what's going on
and they work they're used by physicist
engineers all the time
the issue is we don't really understand
these equations mathematically
and that's what i mean when i say are
they well posed that's something that we
can't
answer as mathematicians we can use the
equations do really cool stuff with them
but we just don't really know we haven't
gotten to the bottom of what's going on
like hidden in that complex maths um
so if you help us understand that you
could potentially get the million dollar
prize and then the fourth and final one
uh this is the one that was solved
which is why everyone was so excited to
hear about it last time which is the
poincare conjecture
it was sold by gregory perelman this
russian mathematician shown here
um so he solved this in 2002 um
and uh he then actually refused the
million dollar prize
so it's a very interesting story in
itself and i talked through the whole
story
uh for everybody last time but this is
to do with four-dimensional objects
um and topology and it kind of asks um
if i have something that's smooth
and finite in four dimensions can it be
deformed
to a four-dimensional sphere so it's
quite an abstract problem but it's quite
a famous one because it's the one that's
been solved and the only one so far
that's been solved so the other three
that i just mentioned riemann navier
stokes p versus mp
currently all unsolved the three i'm
going to talk about tonight
currently all unsolved so there's still
six million dollars available
for anybody who really wants to have a
go at this uh so on to
uh this evening um so we're gonna do the
voting again so i'm going to cover
all but i think it's nice to let the
audience let you all
decide the order in which we cover them
um so
but there is a first poll now which
hopefully if you click on polls
on the on the panel you'll be able to
cast your vote for which one you want to
hear about first
uh but as i said you don't need to panic
too much because i will cover all three
uh today so we've got uh the burst and
swinnerton dyer
conjecture as the the first one i've got
here
this is all about things called elliptic
equations
which is a particular type of equation
and it's about figuring out
when they have uh rational or fraction
solutions and these are very important
in cryptography which i have a picture
of an
iphone because elliptic curve
cryptography is actually
used to encrypt imessage so if you've
ever owned an iphone and used apple's
imessage
service or even used it perhaps on
another apple product then you've
actually interacted with elliptic curves
without realizing it
and that's what birchwood and diet
conjecture is all about
um we've got the hodge conjecture uh
this is
uh incredibly abstract to to put it
politely um you'll see where did i talk
about this but
uh this is by far the most inaccessible
of all of the millennium problems i will
do my very best
um to explain as much of it as i can for
everybody
but fundamentally it's asking um
we have some particular objects that we
are interested in called hodge classes
and the conjecture says can we build
them from
smaller simpler pieces uh called
algebraic cycles
so it's kind of asking like can we build
more complicated structures
from simpler pieces which is why i've
got a picture of lego because in lego
you take simple pieces and you build
castles and pirate ships and all kinds
of cool stuff
so that's the lego one hydroconjecture
and then the third and final one
uh for you to vote for will be yang
mills and the mascot hypothesis
this is all about quantum theory and how
we are trying to mathematically
uh describe what's happening in things
called quantum
fields um so this one's very physically
and very much to do with quantum
um is what we'll be talking about there
right so i think the
poll people have been voting so i will
go and have a look
um at which one is the current lead
right i'm assuming i'm hoping everyone
has now voted we've got yang mills
running away with it i think with 50 odd
percent 51
and i predicted this actually right so
yang mills is gonna be the first one so
as i said this is all about quantum
theory
uh i've got a artistic uh representation
here of uh
quantum teleportation is the idea behind
that image um so the young mills mascot
hypothesis
one way of interpreting this is is it's
kind of asking the question
um why do things have mass and this is
where the mass gap
aspect comes into it um so it's the idea
that the theory itself is predicting
that there are no massless particles
such a particle isn't possible
everything has to have some
mass um and so that's kind of why you
can perhaps put this like philosophical
spin
on the question and say why do things
have mass um
but to really get into the the actual
maths
and and the physics behind it um i'm
going to start by giving you all a bit
of a history lesson
um in in sort of where we're at
in in terms of physics and in terms of
understanding um and the quantum world
um however i do have a very
short clip which doesn't have any sound
so i'll just play this so this is a clip
from ant-man
um one of the uh marvel movies uh and
this is where um
paul rhodey plays ant-man he clicks his
little clicker to shrink down to ant-man
but he continues to shrink his button
was broke
and he continues to go smaller and
smaller and smaller and he sort of
shrinks so much that he enters
the quantum world um as they call it
they refer to i think as the quantum
realm
um which is sort of this crazy world
where space and time no longer makes
sense
i think in the film he's kind of
supposedly trapped down there for many
years but when he comes back out
he hasn't aged and all these things like
obviously it's hollywood so it's
not really based on too much science but
it's an interesting concept
that we see the quantum world
or one of the ways we try to interpret
it is almost as like an actual
different universe like a different
realm um
to to you know the ones as humans and i
will come back to that point which is
why i wanted to just start by showing
you that little clip
um but as i said we're going to do a bit
of a physics history lesson
and so i've got a quote here which is
attributed to the lord kelvin
um from the 18th century or 19th century
i think was the 18th century which says
there is nothing new to be discovered
in physics all that remains is more and
more precise
measurement um now this is quite unfair
to sort of
call out lord kelvin on this because he
did loads of amazing stuff
but this was the general belief of
physicists at the time
um because what had happened was we had
the work of newton
we had newtonian mechanics and so this
is um
thinking back to newton's third three
laws of motion
for example you know force is mass times
acceleration
that kind of idea all of that work from
newton
had been done we'd understood it and for
pretty much
any situation that physicists in the
18th century could come up with
it fit it worked so it was reasonable
to sort of think as a physicist we've
completed physics like we've solved it
we we've got the theory down
we've got the equation the you know some
of the stuff
didn't quite work but
it's probably because we didn't have
accurate we don't have accurate enough
measuring instruments
and that was the general belief um at
the time
now slight tangent but it's really cool
so i'm going to do it for you all
um is these two uh
physicists mathematicians newton um and
lord kelvin
so i am actually mathematically related
to both of them and what i mean by this
is there's this
thing that exists in the maths community
called your
maths genealogy it's a really cool
project and basically if you do a math
phd
then your phd supervisor is seen as your
like father
in the family tree or your mother um and
then you can sort of trace their
supervisor back and you create
your sort of maths um family tree with
branches
and so i actually did mine the other day
and you've got me right up at the top
and then around here you have lord
kelvin and then right down
towards the bottom uh you have isaac
newton so this is just pure coincidence
and a bit of a tangent from my
story i'm trying to tell but i thought
it was pretty cool so i had to share it
with you all
um so when i said some of the
measurements we had didn't quite
agree with with newton's nuisance theory
one of them was the orbit of mercury
so um mercury of course the closest
planet to the sun
you have a prediction of the shape of
this orbit
from newtonian mechanics and then if you
measure
using the instruments available at the
time in the 18th century
um it didn't quite match like it's super
super close but you know there was a
little bit of discrepancy
and physicists at the time thought that
was because
i didn't have good enough telescopes
however
it turns out that now we have better
telescopes and it still doesn't work
um so there's potentially you know it'll
be a small issue but there's something
possibly
going on there and then one of the other
things
um that sort of also didn't quite work
with newtonian mechanics and that
understanding of physics
with black body radiation here's a
diagram showing you various wavelengths
of light
and their color temperature so an
idealized black body
will theoretically absorb light of all
wavelengths
which means that it should output an
infinite amount of energy
which of course isn't possible so that
was also a slight discrepancy that
physicists in the 18th century
couldn't really resolve so they seem
like small problems that's why they
thought oh it's just because we haven't
yet got
good enough measuring instruments
however
to fix the first puzzle the orbit of
mercury
we basically needed einstein and the
theory of general relativity
so the reason mercury's orbit isn't
quite
the perfect ellipse predicted by
newtonian mechanics
is because newtonian mechanics doesn't
account for the curvature of space-time
so you have your sun very massive
object and then you have mercury is
close enough
to the sun that it isn't moving in a
plane anymore
it's moving on a curve in space-time and
so that's
with that modification and einstein's
theory of relativity
suddenly we have a perfect prediction of
mercury's orbit
so it seemed like a small issue possibly
because our telescopes weren't good
enough
turns out you just had to invent modern
physics to actually
fix it um and the second problem was
similar
so to solve the issue with black body
radiation
actually required the invention of
quantum theory
or the discovery depending on your
philosophical belief
i'll probably switch between invent and
discover but anyway
um so the the invention of quantum
theory and
the the way you resolve that one was the
fact that light
shown here by this wave um made up of
small particles
so light behaves both as a particle and
a wave
um and what that means in your black
body radiation situation
is that instead of absorbing light of
all wavelengths light is actually
absorbed in
quanta or packets of energy and that's
quantum that's where quantum theory
uh comes from so in order to fix these
two tiny issues
that physicists had in the 18th century
we literally had to
invent modern physics um
quantum theory is it's weird
right i teach quantum theory to my
second year
undergrad and like i absolutely love it
but just
some of the stuff that you you you find
out in conduit it's just very
very difficult for us to grasp because
it's so different
to our experiences in sort of the
medium-sized
uh world that we're in compared to this
micros well
sub-atomic um quantum
realm and one of the ways in which it's
weird
as i've mentioned here was this idea
that light behaves both as a particle of
the wave
and you have the very famous um double
slit
experiment sort of shown here in this
animation
uh which is this idea that if you
imagine light here shooting these
particles
there's all these dots coming through as
you're viewing them from
one perspective light is behaving as a
particle so you have two slits and all
you see
are marks where you know the balls or
the particles have gone through the
slits
however if you observe from a different
location
what you see instead is this full wave
pattern
so in that's much like if you have um
waves
on water and you have a water wave
hitting
a grate or a grid you actually get this
sort of um spreading out pattern
uh on the far side so we have the whole
like quantum
basically is is very peculiar and very
difficult for us to grasp what's going
on
that's often why it is pictured as a
quantum realm like
for example um in ant-man
so just to sort of summarize where we're
at we've got
general relativity uh which is for large
fast-moving objects
eg planets and stars if we move down to
sort of our scale
so i've called these medium-sized
objects such as people
and billiard balls the classic example
of demonstrating newtonian mechanics
then we use neutronium for that sort of
middle sized
uh objects like sort of our lives in
some sense
uh and then on the very small scale
subatomic scale like eg electrons quarks
those kinds of particles we have quantum
theory
so this is kind of where we're at um in
terms of modern physics
and the yang mills problem
relates to a process called quantization
so whilst i've drawn the arrows going
down here as in going down in size
what should actually be true and what we
are finding
is true is that you can take quantum
theory
so everything that's happening on this
subatomic scale you can take
what we know about that and you can
actually apply it
and have it explain everything happening
to medium-sized
objects at the moment we don't think it
will go up any further
right that's kind of getting into the
discussion of the grand unified theory
of physics
so at the moment it definitely as far as
i can tell like we don't really have any
insight into whether we can go you know
quantum will do all three but we
definitely know
or at least through the various work
that's been done
that quantum theory will actually work
on this middle scale
and this process of replacing newtonian
mechanics and newton's laws
replacing them with quantum laws
is what's called quantization so that's
currently happening
in in maths and in physics trying to to
take what's happening in quantum theory
what we understand there and
use it to explain medium-sized objects
and the physics of our
sort of the world that we experience now
the things that we can do finite degrees
of freedom
so for example if i have like four
interacting particles
um then each particle will have a
position in 3d space
and it will also probably have a
velocity and maybe a couple of other
parameters but in total there's going to
be a finite
degrees of freedom to that system
because i have say
four particles or a finite number of
actual particles
um and that whole branch of physics
maths is called quantum mechanics
now from finite you can then
do infinite degrees of freedom
and here giving the example of an
electromagnetic field
um so here i sort of picture in my head
doing an experiment at school
where you have a magnet and you create
the magnetic force field lines with the
iron filings on the piece of paper
such a cool experiment so so i sort of
picture that and what's happening there
is because you have a and a magnetic
field electromagnetic field
like you can no longer like your degrees
of freedom becomes infinite because you
need to describe
the entire face itself so it's like the
whole plane
needs to have like a coordinate and the
plane is infinite
you're getting infinite degrees of
freedom um so
finite degrees of freedom quantum
mechanics infinite degrees of freedom
it's called quantum field theory we're
almost there
within quantum field theory we have yang
mills gage
theory so and this
we believe is a very good candidate for
describing the interactions between
quarks
which are small fundamental particles um
that make
make up uh electrons protons neutrons
and also the strong nuclear force which
is the force holding together
the center of the uh of an atom
just to kind of recap we've got this
process of quantization
which is taking quantum theory
everything we know about quantum
and using it to describe the real world
the world around us that we can see
um finite degrees of freedom we've got
quantum mechanics that's a big tick we
know what's going on
infinite degrees it's called quantum
field theory
that's way trickier one of the methods
used
to currently try to understand it is
called yang mill's gauge theory
and it's very important for quarks and
strong nuclear force
now the final part to understanding
the yang mills millennium problem is to
think about your
em spectrum electromagnetic spectrum uh
so we've got
i've just written three possible
components here so we've got uv light
visible light and infrared
so you've got um at the top you have
your short wavelength
going down to longer wavelength so at
the top you've got higher energy
so it's in decreasing energy order now
within yangmill's gauge theory
when we're working with and this is
where we're talking about
electromagnetic fields which is why the
em spectrum is is relevant
so within uv high energy
em waves we understand that using a
process called perturbation theory
and that's just a particular tool that
physicists use
it works it explains what happens in
experiments
pretty much perfectly so physicists are
like this is awesome
we're going to use perturbation theory
when i have a high energy
electromagnetic
field now when i have a lower energy one
on the infrared side uh we use a
different theory
if you're a physicist you use lattice
gauge theory to do this
so the million dollar problem the
yang mills um is basically to say well
this is the em spectrum which is
continuous you just increase your
uh wavelength as you move down uh in the
the way i've shown it here
so there's no reason from a mathematical
standpoint at least
there's no reason why we should have
different theories
for different wavelengths or different
energies so the young mills question
says these should actually basically be
the same theory
but at the moment we can't connect them
so the way to earn your million dollars
is to do two things final slide number
one
is to define yang mills theory in four
dimensions
so three spatial dimensions and time so
you have to
first of all come up with what that
theory is
much like einstein came up with
relativity and much like
quantum theory was born in the early
1900s you've got to come up with 4d
yangmil's theory
and not only that you've also
using your brand new theory that you've
come up with use it to prove
something called the mass gap property
and that is what you have to do for your
million dollars
um so i that's as good as i can uh
explain that as a non-quantum physicist
for you all
so i hope um that was enlightening um
and i will now open up the second
pole of the evening for the remaining
two problems so we've done young mills
um obviously i've attempted to to
explain young mills for you all so now
we've got
bloodshed and dire and hodge remaining
we will do both
but please pick which one you would like
me uh to talk about next
and both of these actually have exercise
i'm going to actually set you a little
exercise to do
during both of these sections um so get
yourself also whilst
if you vote first and then make sure
you've got pen and paper so you can try
and um
solve a couple of simple problems that
i'm going to uh set for you all as well
so virginia's releasing diary is about
elliptic curves which is a particular
type of equation
which i will show you examples of and
explain hodge conjecture
super abstract um talking about
building complicated things from simpler
pieces in short
three two one right
it looks like it's the hodge conjecture
so i didn't predict this one would be
next i
but i said i was trying to set my slides
up so i'm gonna have to go over and
change my slides
um so well done for not conforming to to
what i thought you might all vote for
all right so hodge conjecture it is
right so as i um mentioned when i was um
first introducing the problem kind of
we have a particular set particular
system
of equations and we want to know whether
the solution
to that system of equations can be made
or can be built
from simpler pieces so that's why i have
this picture of lego it's about thinking
we've got simple building blocks to make
very complicated structures
and this is actually a really powerful
tool in maths so whenever you have some
very complicated object or some new
objects that you've just discovered
one of the best ways to try to
understand it is actually
to be able to uh explain it or be able
to show that it's made up of
simpler pieces or smaller pieces that we
happen to already understand
and that's basically the hard conjecture
in its essence right it just so happens
that
when i say simpler pieces they're
definitely simpler
than the original thing but they
themselves
are also insanely complicated
um so also a very interesting thing
about the hodge conjecture
uh sort of like a fun fact if you will
is that
depending on which expert so
you know find a group of mathematicians
working in
algebraic geometry which is kind of this
field
depending on who you ask you will get a
different definition of what the hodge
conjecture
is which i think really
drives home just how complicated and
abstract
this is for the millennium problems it's
definitely the most
inaccessible but i'll do my best
so we're gonna go into uh the world of
topology
um so in topology a donut and a teacup
are the same thing if you've ever heard
of topology you probably know this
um because it's a very fun fact to sort
of share with people
um and the reason you treat them as the
same is sort of what's shown by this
picture and also by this animation
is that you can take your teacup and you
can
pull up the bottom and then you can use
the handle
and kind of stretch it out to create
your donut and you know and then you can
reverse that process
i should reverse order these pictures to
to make
back the teacup um so the reason that we
say they're the same
is that when you're working in topology
what you're kind of doing is
geometry without distances
so when we're doing euclidean geometry
which is what you learn at school
you know we're working with triangles
circles squares
cubes spheres if we're going to 3d but
distance is important
like that the concept of distance is
very important and and we'll see this
when i talk about the birch swimming and
dire conjecture i'll be talking about
triangles
and we'll be measuring the side lengths
and the areas of triangles
because distance and therefore area is
an important concept
in geometry it's not in topology you
don't care about
the the size or the distance between
points you care about their fundamental
structure so that's why a teacup and a
donut are the same
because both of them have a single hole
the donut has a hole in the middle
the teacup has a hole in the handle
otherwise
they are the same object
so shapes that are the same
um in topology or they are deemed to be
the same
if you can do what we call a smooth
transformation
from one of them to the other or or
reverse
um and when i say smooth transformation
there are certain rules
as to what that means uh that the
technical term for a smooth
transformation is a homeomorphism
and so that's probably a new word to
most of you that's a fun one for you a
smooth transformation
it's called the homeomorphism in maths
and basically what it's saying is you
you cannot
um you cannot tear your object
you cannot add holes so you can't
puncture it and you cannot glue pieces
together
so the way to think about it is really
imagine your object was made of blue
tack or made of play-doh
so if you have your donut made of
play-doh like we saw in the animation
it could be smoothly deformed at no
point was any where any pieces ripped
off
we didn't puncture it we didn't add any
extra holes and we didn't glue any
pieces together
we just made a very gradual change by
lifting up the bottom of the cup
and then we kind of smoothed it out to
get the donut shape
so that would be a homeomorphism that
would satisfy the rules
uh to be a homeomorphism so if you can
do this smooth transformation
between the two things then they are
topologically the same
so i've got an example for you that i
want you all to think about
um we have a donut again
like we've just seen and we have an
earthworm and i would like to know
and this is going to be a poll uh so
click on the polls panel and
cast your vote is a doughnut
topologically the same
as an earthworm if you haven't got a
clue just just
pick whatever feels right to a
topologist
we've already seen that a donut is the
same as a teacup on the first
slide it's very even so far
though it seems like no is edging ahead
so i can reveal
the correct answer is in fact yes
i think um because
here is a diagram of the anatomy of an
earthworm something i never thought i
would ever learn until i was googling
this today
and what basically it shows is that the
earthworm has a digestive tract
much like we do as humans from its mouth
all the way down
to its tail uh and what's labeled its
anus at the bottom
so an earthworm theoretically has a hole
all the way through the center of its
body
from its mouth to its bum um and so
therefore
i would argue that it's topologically
the same as a donut because they both
have a
single hole through the center of course
this is a completely ridiculous example
but uh it's the kind of thing that you
can play around with um in this
crazy realm of topology um and why
abstract math is quite fun now
so we have this this idea of a smooth
transition a homeomorphism where you can
turn one thing to another
and then they're topologically the same
so given that we're allowed
to to do certain things i did i also
listed lots of things we can't do right
i said you can't tear them
there are certain properties which are
invariant
to homeomorphisms so when you do the
smooth transformation
there are certain certain properties
that won't change
now some of these properties we've
already seen one um with the donut and
the
teacup and the earthworm is the number
of holes
so this is why you can't puncture your
object and why you can't glue pieces
together or tear pieces off
because that would change the number of
holes
that your object had and that is a
topological invariant so that is
something that isn't allowed to be
changed
when doing a homeomorphism so that's one
way of telling an object apart
so for example a doughnut is always
different to a football
because a football has no holes and a
doughnut has one
so they can never topologically be the
same
because their invariant their number of
holes
differs so that's how you can tell
things apart if their
one of their invariants has a different
value
another topological invariant is
something called the euler
characteristic and this is what i'm
going to hopefully
introduce a lot of you to and what i'm
going to ask you all to actually have a
little
uh give you a question or two to have a
play around with this for yourself
because it's quite fun
i think anyway so the euler
characteristic it's a reasonably simple
formula
so it's given by x is equal to v
minus e plus f
and here v represents vertices
or the number of corners e
represents the number of edges of your
shape
and f is going to represent the number
of
faces so your euler characteristic is
the number of
vertices the minus the number of edges
e plus the number of faces
and this is something that doesn't
change
when you do this smooth transformation
so if two objects have the same
euler characteristic then they are
potentially
um topologically the same right but if
they have a different
euler characteristic then they are
definitely not
the same topologically so it's important
to clarify between the two
um now i've got an example with a cube
to show you how this works
um so what we need to do is first of all
count
the number of vertices so i'll give you
10 seconds for you all to think about
this
how many corners does a cube have
actually if you want to write your
answers in the chat let me open the chat
window
so how many corners does a cube have you
just need a cube
and you need to get counting or you need
to try and maybe picture one in your
head
so i would argue that the number of
corners on a cube
um is going to be one two three
four on the top and then on the bottom
uh i think i'm also gonna have one two
three and then one at the back four so i
think there's going to be eight
corners on a cube and i can see lots of
people typing your answers thank you for
joining in
uh so i can see lots of eights as well
appearing um so i think there are eight
we've got the four on the top
and then the four uh on the bottom so
the number of vertices
is going to be eight for my cube
now the number of edges this is
given by one of these uh sort of like
white lines in my picture here
so an edge is going to be along the edge
of the shape
perhaps what you might expect for an
edge so next
have a little think to yourself how many
edges
does a cube have and of course be
careful not to double count
uh as well so how many unique edges uh
will there be
on a cube so i'm seeing lots of twelves
well done
for people saying twelve so you have
four on the top four on the bottom
and then you have these four vertical
edges as well
so that's going to be 12. and then
finally faces
hopefully we all know how many faces a
cube has if you've ever
played with a dice standard die then
you'll know
that the number of faces of a cube is of
course six
so you count your your vertices your
edges your faces
you plug those three numbers into our
formula for the euler characteristic
and your answer is two so a
cube has euler characteristic equal
to two and this as i said is a
topological invariant
so if you have another shape that has an
euler characteristic
that is not equal to two it cannot be
topologically the same as a cube because
it has a different number uh for the
euler characteristic and that is
something that is invariant so cannot be
changed through these smooth
transformations
all right now in order to calculate
the euler characteristic for a shape
there are certain things that we're
allowed to do
and it relates back to homeomorphisms
these smooth transformations
we're allowed to deform our shape
to give it edges and to give it faces
so we can push and stretch it into
something that has
vertices edges and faces and then we can
count them
and because all we did was push and
stretch
you know we didn't add holes or anything
else because all we did
was do a smooth transformation or a
homeomorphism
remember the euler characteristic is
invariant it doesn't change
so whatever answer we get after we
change our shape
has to be the same as the original shape
we started with so what i mean
for example is let's take a circle so i
can turn a circle here
into a triangle by just kind of
squashing it a bit
and if i now count the euler
characteristic for a triangle
so that's going to be um
number of corners v is three the number
of edges of a tr
trying also three face so the euler
characteristic for a triangle
and four for a circle is going to be
one because we've got three edges three
vertices three edges and one face
so a triangle has euler characteristic
one and because
i can push and stretch my circle into a
triangle
the circle also has euler characteristic
one
so this is different to the euler
characteristic of a cube
which was two so a circle and a cube are
topologically different they are not the
same
object now we can also do this with a
sphere
so here's a little uh animation showing
you how you can turn a sphere into a
cube
by kind of just stretching it out to
fill the cube
so we want to calculate the euler
characteristic of a sphere
we just stretch it into a cube we
already calculated
the value of x for a cube which we got
to be two
so the euler characteristic of a sphere
is the same as a cube
and is equal to two so if you have an
object
which doesn't have edges or faces or
corners
then you can always deform it so that it
does
and then you count up v e and
f and then plug your numbers into the
formula and that's okay
as long as all you're doing is pushing
and stretching you cannot add or remove
holes
that's really important to remember now
homework exercise well it's not homework
because you're going to do it now
hopefully
i'm going to give you three shapes and i
want you to have a go at calculating the
euler characteristic
um yourself at home so remember there's
the formula
we need the number of corners v or
vertices number of edges in
number of faces f so the first one
is going to be a tetrahedron and if you
want to write your answers in the chat
that'll be great i'll give you a minute
also to work through these and then i'll
go through the answers
um we're going to do an octagon is going
to be your second
shape i would like to know the euler
characteristic for and the third and
final one
is going to be a cd and i want you to
treat the cd
as it's as a two-dimensional object
but the important thing about the cd is
it has a hole in the middle
so i'll give you one final tip when
you're so the first two hopefully are
reasonably straightforward
the third one if you have a hole in the
middle of your face
it's not actually a face
okay so when we describe a face such as
the face of a cube or the face
of a tetrahedron it doesn't have a hole
in it
so your cd does not have one face
you have to do something cleverer to
turn it into a different shape
so as i said i'll give you like a minute
also have a think about this as i said
please do join in get yourself some pen
and paper draw these shapes and get
counting
uh edges and corners and then i'll give
you the answers uh in
in just a moment
so you just need to count the number of
corners
uh v for your tetrahedron and your
octagon
number of edges e and then the faces um
f plug in those numbers into your
formula
and then you should get uh the value for
x
uh for those first two objects for the
third object for your cd
you've got to be more careful because
you're not allowed to have the hole
in the middle so you have to do
something slightly different
uh to be able to solve that one so i'm
just going to have a look and see what
we've got over here so we've got
2 1 one two one zero two one two
two one two i feel like there's a lot of
agreement on two and one
for the first two but then there seems
to be uh
varying opinions for the third one the
cd the tricky one
so um the tetrahedron very well done for
anyone who worked out the x is two
the the tetrahedron in fact is actually
just the same as a cube
and the same as a sphere because just
like we turn the cube we turn the sphere
into a cube
by stretching it out you could also have
shrunk it down and got the pyramid
got the tetrahedron so it's definitely
two
for the first one and you can also get
that from just counting the corners and
the edges
the octagon we've got eight corners
eight edges and one face
so the answer's gonna be one uh for the
octagon
which i think a lot of you also got now
the cd this is tricky because what
you've got to do for the cd
is as i said you can't leave the hole
here so what you actually have to do
is turn but what i did anyway the way i
thought about it
is you turn the the circle on the
outside and the circle on the inside
turn them both into squares which you're
allowed to do
so now you have like a like a square
with a square hole
in the middle but you've still got um a
hole
in that central face so what you then do
is you add in
diagonal lines between the corners so
you have your inner square
and your outer square with diagonal
lines joining the corners
and then what you've got is four
trapezium
shaped faces so you have four faces
once you do that and then you count the
number of edges so you'll have four
around the edge four in the middle so
you have 12 edges
uh 12 edges four faces and eight
um corners and so your euler
characteristic
is zero for the cd uh if we have time i
can
probably draw that out for you during
the q a but for now i want to
move back to the hodge conjecture but
very well done anyone who managed to get
those and thank you everyone for for
joining in
um okay so we've talked about
um topology this idea of smooth
transformations between objects
we talked about that's called a
homeomorphism that's how you move
between objects
and we have these properties called
topological invariants
that don't change when you move between
two
uh between your objects so when you do a
homomorphism your topological invariants
don't change
okay um this is mr hodge by the way
william hodge
after who the conjecture is named so um
in variants we've seen so we've seen the
number of holes
is an invariant the we've just looked at
the euler characteristic
that's another invariant and there's a
third invariant
which is relevant to the hodge
conjecture which is called
a co homology class now
there is no way i can possibly explain
in simple terms
what a co-homology class is all you need
to remember is
it's an invariant it's a property of a
shape
that doesn't change when you do this
molding and these smooth deformations
if you if you're really mathematically
minded it's a closed differential form
there you go um so we have these another
type of invariant
just like the two we've seen with the
holes and the euler characteristic we
have a third one
well there's actually many but this one
is a third one in our list
called a co homology class the hodge
conjecture says
when can we construct a type of co
homology class called a hodge class
from simpler pieces and that is about
all i can give you in terms of the hodge
conjecture
so we're talking about topology we're
thinking about
uh smooth transformations between shapes
and this content and this idea of a
homeomorphism
we've got things that don't change
called invariants
the hodge conjecture is all about trying
to understand
a particular type of invariant called
a co homology class and it says are
certain co homology classes built from
smaller pieces
um which are called uh sorry a certain
type
of co-homology class called a hodge
class are those
built from simpler pieces
and that's it that is the hodge
conjecture in as much as i can possibly
explain
for you this evening uh so that brings
us back to voting
uh and i believe there's only going to
be one left which is going to be
uh the birch and swinnerton dire
conjecture so
i'm guessing maybe we do still have a
poll but obviously there's only one
option
so just to recap i i mentioned uh this
is all to do with objects called
elliptic
curves or elliptic equations um and what
we want to know
is the number of rational solutions to a
particular elliptic equation
and by a rational solution we mean
either a whole number solution
or a solution that can be written as a
fraction um
so that's actually what it says it says
is there an easy way to tell
the number of rational solutions to a
given elliptic equation
and this is really important in
cryptography elliptic curve cryptography
which is using iphones
um so as i said you have interacted the
vast majority of you will have
interacted with this in your lives
without realizing
it um so we're trying to understand
these elliptic curves
through this uh millennium problem okay
so to start off i'm going to give you
another
exercise and another um let's call it
piece of homework
uh and it's actually what we're gonna do
is look at a puzzle
uh that used to um entertain
the ancient greeks so so the the
thinkers and the philosophers and and
whatnot
of ancient greece used to entertain
themselves with this exact
uh puzzle and it's to do with triangles
two really important
triangle theorems written for you there
just to remind you all
um so if you have a right angled
triangle sides a
b and then the diagonal is length c then
first of all pythagoras's theorem
says that a squared plus b squared is
equal to c squared
and also the area of your triangle is
one half
times the base a times the height
b so both of those two things are
satisfied by a right angle triangle
now the ancient greek puzzle goes as
follows
if i give you a positive whole
number let's call it d so i give you
some number
d then your challenge is to find
a right angled triangle where
a b and c are all rational numbers
so they're all either whole numbers or
fractions
such that the area is equal to
d and what i want you to do is to try
and figure this out for d
equals six so i would do d equals six
first because it's much
easier and then if you're feeling really
adventurous
try and come up with a solution for d
equals five
and again if you want to write your
answers in the chat that'd be fab so i
can
see how everyone's getting on so again
to go over this
i'm saying i want you to find me a right
angled triangle
which has area equal to six
and it has to be such that a
b and c so all three side lengths
have to be either whole numbers or
fractions
so they can't be pi they can't be the
square root of two
they can't be irrational numbers they
have to be whole numbers
or fractions so first of all i want you
to try and do this
when the area d is equal to six
and then if you're feeling really uh
adventurous try and do it
for d equal to five so five is much
trickier six hopefully
uh a few of you can figure out so i can
only see some answers coming through
um for the for the d equals six case
uh i'll give you about 30 seconds or so
to have a bit more of a think
about d equals five because i am going
to show you the answers so i don't want
to reveal them too soon
in case people are trying to figure this
out so we want
a b and c to be uh fractions
it's going they are fractions for d
equals i'll give you that
we want a b and c to be fractions so
that the area of a triangle is five
um and a b and c are all indeed
fractions
but well done anybody who is seeing lots
of correct answers for d
equals six so very well done not sure if
i've yet
seen an answer for d equals five though
i would be insanely impressed if anybody
was able to come up with it in such a
short time of it
um so if you don't wanna know the answer
i guess look away now because i'm going
to show you the answer
um so for d equals six uh a lot of
you've written the answer it's um
what's called a three four five triangle
it's a very famous
uh pythagorean triple because it gives
you three
whole numbers that satisfy pythagoras
theorem
so um 3 squared is 9 4 squared is 16.
5 squared is 25 so a squared plus b
squared is indeed c squared
and then the area of the triangle is a
half
times four times three which is six so
that's uh
there are probably our other answers but
that would be one of the correct answers
uh for d equals six now for d equals
five
much more difficult uh but this one will
work so
you can have a triangle with three over
two
the height so one and a half along the
base
it's 20 divided by three so when you
multiply those two numbers together you
get 10
and then you divide by 2 and the area is
indeed 5
and when you plug these two numbers into
pythagoras
it tells you that the diagonal is 41
divided by 6
which is also a fraction of course so d
much trickier um but this is a very rich
area of study and there's lots of
interesting triangles you can try and
come up with and sort of triangle
problems based around just these two
uh simple rules pythagoras theorem and
the area
um of a triangle now other than being
fun this is actually very relevant
to elliptic curves because to actually
solve this problem it turns out what
you're solving
is this equation so
if you can solve y squared
equals x cubed minus d squared
times x so if you solve that
for x and y where x and y have to be
rational
numbers so x and y are whole numbers or
fractions
if you can and d here is the number
right d is your area
so we just did d equals six or d equals
five so you plug in
your value of d and then if you solve
this
equation for rational fractions
fractions x and y then you actually get
the answers for your triangle lengths a
b
and c and the way it works is as follows
so here's my triangle abc so you set
a is equal to x squared minus d
squared divided by y so again
we know d d is given to us from the area
x and y are the solutions to this
equation that we have to find it's
tricky to find x and y
but if you solve that equation for
fraction x and y
then we know those values so a is x
squared minus d squared over y
b is given by 2xd divided by y
and c your diagonal is then x squared
plus d squared
all divided by y you can check that this
works
so we can plug it into pythagoras
theorem
so this says this will only be a right
angled triangle if a squared plus b
squared
equals c squared so if i do a squared
added
to b squared it looks like that
if i now expand out that first bracket
i'll get x to the fourth minus two
x squared d squared but then i add on
four x squared d squareds so what it
turns into
is this x to the fourth plus two x
squared d
squared plus d to the fourth divided by
y squared
and then finally you look at this
formula and say
oh but that's exactly c squared so
that's exactly
equal to the value of c squared so this
does work
um so if you take this to be a b and c
it satisfies
pythagoras's theorem and then we also
have to check
that it satisfies the problem for the
area
so the area tells us that we must have
um a half times a times b
must equal d so again we're going to
take
a we're going to multiply it by b and
we're going to divide by
two and hopefully that will give us d so
at first it doesn't look very promising
so that is a
times b divided by two
so first of all the twos cancel uh which
is the first thing to spot
once the twos have cancelled what you do
is you take the x um
inside the first bracket so now it's x
cubed minus d squared
x and then you leave the d outside
because now what we've got is d times
x cubed minus d squared x all divided by
y
squared but we haven't used
the equation at the top yet so we solved
x and y
so they satisfied the equation in the
black box so what we know is we know
that y
squared is actually x cubed minus d
squared x
so if i put that on the bottom to
replace the y squared
they perfectly cancel out and you're
just left with
d so this is
a different way of solving the triangle
problem
so trying to do that ancient greek
puzzle about can you find a triangle
with rational fraction side lengths area
d
turns out and this happens all the time
in maths it's exactly the same problem
as trying to solve this equation for
rational or fraction x and y
and that's sort of i've gone through
this very quickly but this is how you
show they're actually the identical
problem
now this in the box this is an elliptic
equation so this is what that ancient
greek triangle puzzle
has to do with the million dollar birch
when it's in dire conjecture
because this is actually a special case
of an elliptic equation so elliptic
equations
have the following form it's y squared
is equal to x cubed plus
something times x plus b
so in our example on the page before
we've got
x cubed we've got the a is equal to
minus d squared
and b is zero so a
is minus d squared b is zero
therefore we have exactly an elliptic
curve now they give you some pretty
funky graphs
uh in all honesty so uh here's an
example
of one particular elliptic curve so i
think this is for
a equals one and b equals one and so
they're pretty cool shaped graphs
um right because you've got a y squared
you've got an x cubed and other things
happening
so it looks like this and in fact what
you can now do is if i
decide so i have a value for a if i fix
that value
right so if i fix a and then b
in this picture is positive and if i
start to now decrease
b so if i if i fix a and let b get
smaller and smaller
it's going to eventually decrease to
zero and then it will go negative
so if you do that as i've done in this
animation
this is what happens so it starts
with our squiggly shape and then as you
decrease
b it kind of pinches off so those two
bits join together
and creates like an island almost of
of a of an ellipse which is maybe why
it's called an elliptic curve in fact
here which then shrinks away as you keep
decreasing b
so you can play around with these things
they're very cool if you just sort of
you know
play around with your favorite way of
plotting graphs and try different values
of a
and b you'll get lots of very
interesting shapes
um sort of you know where you have it
see sometimes it's one piece and
sometimes
they're in several pieces um so elliptic
curves very very interesting
um objects and as i said sort of were
originally
um can be related back to this ancient
greek triangle problem and are really
important today in cryptography
so the birch venus in dire conjecture
then
this is asking that for a given
elliptic curve so if i give you an
elliptic curve which has to remember
have that form
y squared is x cubed plus something
times x plus
something if i give you an elliptic
curve the birchman's director
says um how many
rational points lie on that elliptic
curve so how many points are fractions
for both x and y
so again it's very similar to our
triangle problem at the beginning
um so let's take an example so here
again is an elliptistic curve
if i want to draw the line uh x equals a
half
right so that's this blue line down the
page so that is definitely a rational
number
then what the birch friendliness and
diet conjecture is asking
is first of all you draw this line for
some rational number x
i've picked a half it could be anything
it intersects
our curve at two points let's call them
y1
and y2 and then if we draw those lines
y equals y1 y equals y2 so now the
question is
x is definitely a rational number it's a
fraction
is y or is either y1
or y2 or maybe both are they also
rational numbers can they also be
written
as a fraction so you pick
a rational number for x draw your
vertical line
find out where it intersects and then
read off those y values
if x is rational and one of your y
values is also also rational
then you have a rational solution to
your elliptic
equation you have a rational point on
your elliptic curve
and that's really what we want to know
with birch bennett and dyer but instead
of going through this very laborious
process
of drawing lots of vertical lines for
different
fraction values we want to know is there
a shortcut
so if i just give you an elliptic
equation can you very quickly tell me
whether or not it has an infinite number
of rational points or just a finite
number of rational points so
we think we know how to do this and this
is the conjecture itself
we have something called the hasa vile l
function
now the study of l functions
in itself is a really active
current area of research so we don't yet
know everything about l functions
that we would like to know however we
have this particular
l function called the hasseville l
function after the two people
who worked on it and what we think
of what the birch schweinstein die
conjecture says is
if you take an elliptic equation which
remember
is y squared equals x cubed plus ax plus
b
so take any elliptic equation plug it in
to this function so literally think of
this as a function machine
you feed in any old elliptic equation
that you've made up
pick a value of a and b plug it into the
l function
this will give you one of two possible
outputs
it will either give you zero
if the output is zero that means there
are infinitely many
rational points on your elliptic curve
if it outputs uh one i believe no sorry
if it outputs non-zero
so the output zero you've got infinitely
many
rational points if it outputs anything
else
then there are only finitely many
rational points
so this looks like the perfect way to
test
how many rational points are on any
given elliptic equation
plug your equation in if you get zero
there are infinitely many
if you get a non-zero answer there are
only finitely many
however so we think it works it's been
tested
on millions of different elliptic curves
and
it gives us what we expected to get
however as with all things in maths just
because you've tested it a lot
and it seems to work doesn't mean it's
true so the million dollar
question to get your million dollars
you've got to
prove this so you have to prove that
the hasselbal l function will in fact
determine
the number of rational points for any
given elliptic equation
uh and with that uh that will be all
seven millennium problems done
in two uh royal institution live streams
so thank you very much everyone uh for
sticking with me i know those throws
three
if you were here for the first one i'm
sure you're like thinking
wow those three were like next level
abstract um
but i hope you've been able to follow um
as much of it as possible i tried my
best to
to try to explain it um explain them all
as simple as i could but those three are
by far
the most difficult to get your head
around right the first four that we did
are sort of embedded a bit more in
reality
all of these three are really really
abstract
but i hope you'll agree they are super
cool uh
maths and you know really interesting um
problems so i believe we're gonna do a q
a um
so obviously stick around if you have
any questions but again thank you very
much
for joining in thank you for voting
thank you for taking part in the chat
it's been great i really enjoy
you